4.61
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is lowering its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of one percentage point to 4 per cent. The operating band for the overnight rate is correspondingly lowered, and the Bank Rate is now 4 1/4 per cent.
In the second half of 2007, the Canadian economy grew broadly in line with the Bank's expectations in the October Monetary Policy Report (MPR). Despite some slowing in growth in the fourth quarter, the Canadian economy continues to operate above its production capacity. Both core and total CPI inflation have been lower than projected in the MPR, largely reflecting a price-level adjustment related to increased competitive pressures in the retail sector stemming from the level of the Canadian dollar.
Financial market conditions have deteriorated since October, leading to a tightening of credit conditions in industrial countries. Given this, and a deeper, more prolonged decline in the U.S. residential housing sector, the 2008 outlook for the U.S. economy is now significantly weaker than at the time of the October MPR.
For Canada, the effects of the weaker U.S. economic outlook will lead to additional downward pressure on export growth. However, despite tighter credit conditions, domestic demand in Canada is projected to remain strong. This strength is supported by continued income growth associated with the increase in commodity prices since October, which has led to further gains in our terms of trade. Overall, the Bank now projects weaker growth in 2008 than was expected in October, with the economy moving into modest excess supply in the second quarter of this year. Somewhat stronger growth in 2009 brings the Canadian economy back into balance in early 2010. The inflation projection has also been revised down since October, especially for 2008, primarily reflecting the price-level adjustment noted above and the recent one-percentage-point cut in the GST. Both core and total CPI inflation should fall below 1 1/2 per cent by the middle of this year before returning to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2009. On the whole, the Bank judges that the risks to this inflation projection are roughly balanced.
In line with this outlook, the Bank has decided to lower the target for the overnight rate and further monetary stimulus is likely to be required in the near term to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance and to return inflation to target over the medium term.
The Bank's detailed projection for the economy and inflation, and risks to the projection, will be published in the Monetary Policy Report Update on 24 January 2008.
The Bank of Canada today released its January Monetary Policy Report Update. In this Update, the Bank said that the Canadian economy continues to operate above its production capacity, despite some slowing in growth in the fourth quarter of 2007. Both total and core inflation have been lower than projected in the October Monetary Policy Report, largely reflecting a price-level adjustment related to increased competitive pressures in the retail sector stemming from the level of the Canadian dollar.
Financial conditions have deteriorated since October, leading to tighter credit conditions in industrialized countries. Given this, and a deeper and more prolonged decline in the U.S. housing sector, the U.S. economic outlook for 2008 has been revised downwards significantly.
The weaker U.S. economy will put additional downward pressure on Canada's export growth. Despite tighter credit conditions, domestic demand in Canada is expected to remain strong, supported by continued income growth associated with high commodity prices. Overall, the Bank now projects that the Canadian economy will expand by 1.8 per cent in 2008 and 2.8 per cent in 2009. This implies that the economy will move into excess supply in the second quarter of 2008, and then return to balance in early 2010.
Both core and total CPI inflation are projected to fall below 1 1/2 per cent by the middle of 2008 before returning to 2 per cent by the end of 2009. This primarily reflects the price-level adjustment noted above and, for total inflation, the recent reduction in the GST. Excluding the impact of the GST reduction, total inflation is projected to average close to the 2 per cent target throughout 2008 and 2009.
The risks to the Bank's inflation projection are judged to be roughly balanced. On the upside, there is continued strong momentum in domestic demand growth, and capacity pressures could be stronger than judged, especially if weak productivity growth were to persist. On the downside, the tightening in credit conditions globally and in Canada could be greater and more protracted than assumed, and there could be a more prolonged slowdown in the U.S. economy. As well, competitive pressures in Canada's retail sector could put more downward pressure on prices than assumed.
On 4 December and on 22 January, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of one percentage point, bringing it to 4 per cent. Further monetary stimulus is likely to be required in the near term to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance, and to return inflation to target over the medium term.