-0.91
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the overnight rate at 4 1/4 per cent. The operating band for the overnight rate is unchanged, and the Bank Rate remains at 4 1/2 per cent.
Global economic expansion has remained robust, although economic growth in the United States slowed during 2006. With weaker U.S. growth, output growth in Canada decelerated, likely averaging about 1.6 per cent in the second half of 2006. This was largely due to reduced U.S. demand for building materials and motor vehicles — which has adversely affected Canada's exports — and to the need for Canadian businesses to adjust inventories. Final domestic demand in Canada has continued to contribute strongly to growth. Inflation has evolved largely in line with the Bank's expectations in the October Monetary Policy Report (MPR), with total CPI inflation slightly lower than projected and core inflation slightly higher. The Bank judges that at the end of 2006, the Canadian economy was operating at, or just above, its production capacity.
There are signs that a significant amount of the adjustment in the U.S. housing and automotive sectors has already taken place and that the inventory correction in Canada is well advanced. Accordingly, the Bank projects that economic growth in Canada will pick up to about 2 1/2 per cent in the first half of 2007, and that the economy will continue to operate near its production capacity throughout 2007 and 2008. Total CPI inflation should average just above 1 per cent in the first half of 2007, returning to the 2 per cent inflation target in early 2008. Core inflation should return to 2 per cent in the first half of 2007 and remain there. The Bank continues to judge that the risks to the inflation projection are roughly balanced, but the main upside and downside risks outlined in the October MPR have diminished somewhat. In line with the Bank's outlook, the current level of the target for the overnight rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
An analysis of economic developments, trends, and risks will be outlined in the Monetary Policy Report Update, to be published on 18 January 2007.
The Bank of Canada today released the January update to the Monetary Policy Report, which discusses current economic and financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy.
The Canadian economy is judged to have been operating at, or just above, its production capacity at the end of 2006, following weaker-than-expected growth in the second half of last year. This slowdown stemmed from reduced demand for Canadian exports—related to weakness in the U.S. automotive and housing sectors—and from the need for Canadian businesses to adjust inventories.
Looking ahead, real GDP growth is now expected to average about 2 1/2 per cent in the first half of 2007, rising to about 2 3/4 per cent in the second half of this year. In 2008, growth is projected to remain in line with the growth of potential output (estimated at 2.8 per cent), keeping the economy operating near its capacity throughout the projection period. Expressed on an average annual basis, this profile implies growth of 2.3 per cent in 2007 and 2.8 per cent in 2008.
Total consumer price inflation will continue to be affected by movements in energy prices and, during the first half of 2007, by last year's reduction in the Goods and Services Tax (GST). Total inflation should average just above 1 per cent in the first half of this year, returning to the 2 per cent target in early 2008. Core inflation should return to 2 per cent in the first half of 2007 and stay there.
On 16 January, the Bank left its key policy rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent. The risks around the Bank's inflation projection continue to be judged to be roughly balanced, but the main upside and downside risks have diminished somewhat since the October MPR. The current level of the policy interest rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term.